\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename cclibraries-examples.info
@settitle CCLibraries Examples
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi
@include macros.texi

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      CCLibraries Examples

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    CCLibraries Examples

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           cclibraries-examples

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{mrc.mgg@@gmail.com}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2020


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
This document provides template documentation for the examples distributed with version
@value{VERSION} of @value{PACKAGE}.

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}

@quotation
The author hereby grant permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and license this software and
its documentation for any purpose, provided that existing copyright notices are retained in all
copies and that this notice is included verbatim in any distributions. No written agreement,
license, or royalty fee is required for any of the authorized uses.  Modifications to this software
may be copyrighted by their authors and need not follow the licensing terms described here, provided
that the new terms are clearly indicated on the first page of each file where they apply.

IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR DISTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, ITS DOCUMENTATION, OR
ANY DERIVATIVES THEREOF, EVEN IF THE AUTHOR HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

THE AUTHOR AND DISTRIBUTORS SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND NON-INFRINGEMENT.  THIS
SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ON AN ``AS IS'' BASIS, AND THE AUTHOR AND DISTRIBUTORS HAVE NO OBLIGATION TO
PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @value{VERSION}
@author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                      Overview of the package.
* struct-by-ptr-no-descr::        Data structure type, passed by pointer, without descriptor.
* struct-by-ptr-with-descr::      Data structure type, passed by pointer, with descriptor.
* struct-by-val-no-descr::        Data structure type, passed by pointer, without descriptor.
* struct-by-val-with-descr::      Data structure type, passed by pointer, with descriptor.
* cclib-condition-object::        Exceptional-condition object with CCLibraries @api{}.
* cclib-condition-object-alias::  Exceptional-condition object with CCLibraries @api{}, short aliases.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package


This document provides template documentation for the examples distributed with version
@value{VERSION} of @value{PACKAGE}.

@c page

@include struct-by-ptr-no-descr.texi
@include struct-by-ptr-with-descr.texi
@include struct-by-val-no-descr.texi
@include struct-by-val-with-descr.texi

@include cclib-condition-object.texi
@include cclib-condition-object-alias.texi

@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file

@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: t
@c End:
